# December 13th Session

Thanks so much for all the kids and parents that came last night!  I think the kids had a great time, and I'm confident we've already established "a practice".

-----

I'll occasionally write some notes afterwards, if either the kids or parents have any questions that we weren't able to figure out at the time, either because I didn't know, or because we ran out of time.

In other words, I won't always have notes following the session.

## Understanding infinite series

(Note: the following is ***not*** stuff I expect the kids to talk about.  It's just that some of the parents seemed quite interested in getting into the nitty-gritty, and I was more than happy to oblige.)

I was chatting with Karen and another of the moms (I am horrible with names, I deeply apologize for forgetting your name), and we were discussing the following infinite series:

A: $s_{n} =  \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{8} + ... + \frac{1}{2^{n}}$

and

B: $s_{n} =  \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{3} + \frac{1}{4} + ... + \frac{1}{n}$

-----

The second series diverges (goes to infinity) as *n* goes to infinity.  This is because the series

$s_{n} =  \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{2} + ... + \frac{1}{2}$

goes to infinity (we keep adding $\frac{1}{2}$ forever), and the series

$s_{n} =  \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{3} + \frac{1}{4} + ... + \frac{1}{n}$

could also be written as

$s_{n} =  \frac{1}{2} + \left(\frac{1}{3} + \frac{1}{4}\right) + \left(\frac{1}{5} + \frac{1}{6} + \frac{1}{7} + \frac{1}{8}\right) +  ... + \frac{1}{n}$

which you can hopefully see is continually adding numbers *slightly larger than* $\frac{1}{2}$, so this will diverge as well.

-----

For the first series, I had explained it using a spatial analogy:  if you imagine that *1* is a $1 \times 1$ square, then $\frac{1}{2}$ is a $1 \times \frac{1}{2}$ rectangle. $\frac{1}{4} is a $\frac{1}{2} \times \frac{1}{2}$ square. If we draw them all up, we'll see that they approach a total of 1.  (That is, the sum $\frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{8} + ... + \frac{1}{2^n}$ will eventually reach 1.)

## Understanding the *generalized* infinite series

We then started discussing the series

$s_{n} =  \frac{1}{3} + \frac{1}{9} + \frac{1}{27} + ... + \frac{1}{3^{n}}$

and trying to figure out what it would reach.  And being anal-retentive about the math, I'd really wanted to generalize the concept of something like:

$s_{n} =  \frac{1}{k} + \frac{1}{k^2} + \frac{1}{k^3} + ... + \frac{1}{k^{n}}$

where *k* is a known integer.  E.g., we'd looked at $k = 2$, and now wanted to look at $k = 3$.

We couldn't easily use the geometric trick, and I'd realized that I wouldn't be able to say anything intelligent with the kids clamoring. So I thought about it later, and had to [refresh my memory by looking up an official proof](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1/2_%2B_1/4_%2B_1/8_%2B_1/16_%2B_%E2%8B%AF).

Using the same logic as shown there, we can do the following:

-----

Starting with

$s_{n} =  \frac{1}{k} + \frac{1}{k^2} + \frac{1}{k^3} + ... + \frac{1}{k^n}$

we can then multiply each side by *k*:

$\left(k \times s_{n}\right) =  \frac{k}{k} + \frac{k}{k^2} + \frac{k}{k^3} + ... + \frac{k}{k^n}$

$=  1 + \frac{1}{k} + \frac{1}{k^2} + \frac{1}{k^3} + ... + \frac{1}{k^{n-1}}$

$=  1 + s_{n} - \frac{1}{k^n}$

Moving things around a bit, we have:

$\left(k - 1\right) \times s_{n} = 1 - \frac{1}{k^n}$

which is simply

$\left(k - 1\right) \times s_{n} = 1$

since $\frac{1}{k^n}$ is "vanishingly small" as n approaches infinity.  (We're able to do these "vanishingly small" tricks when we are adding or subtracting from something "non-small".  Ask me if curious.)

Then the final step is

$s_{n} = \frac{1}{k - 1}$

-----

Whew!!

So, for a few quick rundowns:

$k = 2$: the series totals 1

$k = 3$: the series totals $\frac{1}{2}$

etc.

Again, to be clear, $k = 3$ means that the following series

$s_{n} =  \frac{1}{3} + \frac{1}{9} + \frac{1}{27} + ... + \frac{1}{3^{n}}$

totals $\frac{1}{2}$.







